Hi everyone.
Before we get started with the video I just
want to thank everyone who signed up for the
Telos Pictures IndieGoGo campaign.
It has wildly exceeded my craziest expectations
for it and I am so excited to have the chance
to bring you guys really great narrative LGBTQ
content made by LGBTQ people for an LGBTQ
audience.
If you haven't signed up yet there’s still
plenty of time and there’s a link in the
description where you can do so.
Also don't forget to like subscribe and comment
on this video.
You have no idea how much that helps the channel.
Especially since YouTube is not super excited
about propoting queer content.
So like and subscribe.
Comment below.
And now let’s get to the video.
Ever notice that the LGBTQ community seems
to really gravitate toward Marvel’s The
Scarlet Witch?
Yeah me too.
We can assume it’s because she’s a fabulous
dresser and diva supreme, but I think it goes
a lot deeper than that.
And goes a lot further back in time than just
the birth of Disney’s Marvel Cinematic Universe.
It goes back to the Bronze age of comics.
Something comics, or at least western superhero
comics, are not exactly known for is subtlety
and nuance.
They’re known for the BANG, SPLASH, WHAM,
not the meditative and contemplative.
But it hasn’t always been this way.
In the olden days, especially in the Bronze
Age of comics, about 1970 to 1985, comics
were like long running printed soap operas.
You still had all the action any kid could
want, but you also had more mature, drawn
out character interactions that older readers,
who had grown up reading comics, wanted.
When it comes to the Scarlet Witch, Marvel
spent a great deal of time in the Bronze age
examining that character.
This is why, in spite of how bad the writing
could be, I have such a love of that age of
comics because they were driven by character.
Not events.
I find modern comics are built around characters
reacting to the plot and not being given time
to develop.
And this is an industry problem — editors
demand flashier and flashier books with an
emphasis on action panels.
Resulting in comic books with a fraction of
the dialogue that they used to have.
For instance, I can clear through a contemporary
comic book in about 5-10 minutes, depending
on how I read the sparse dialogue.
Older comic titles take me about half an hour
to read, though.
Stan Lee’s old writing style was to write
the outline of what happens in sequence, a
sort of plot outline, hand the outline to
Steve Ditco or Jack Kirby.
And then the would illustrate the whole thing,
and then Lee would go back over it and write
the dialogue to fit what was going on.
For good measure, there’d also be a persistent
narration describing what was going on too.
You can skip a lot of the narrator writing
in older books for this reason and not miss
a beat because Ditco and Kirby were just…
that good at visual storytelling.
These days, and this is in no way a criticism
of individual artists, editors push for comic
books to have a quota of explosions per issue.
(I’m being sarcastic but I wouldn’t actually
be surprised.)
So it’s much harder to track what’s going
on in a title because there’s so much more
pressure to cram as much onto one page as
possible.
Couple that with both Marvel and DC’s apparent
limit of 6-8 issues per story arc, and Marvel’s
pressure on canon-wide crossover events, and
there just isn’t really a whole lot of page
real-estate that can be afforded to just…
letting a moment land.
Because titles that do focus on character-beats,
like — infamously — the She-Hulk run focusing
on her career as a lawyer tend to get canceled
when they don’t hit Avengers Flagship title
sales numbers.
There doesn’t seem to be a whole lot of
places to get slice-of-super-hero-life kinda
stuff.
Everything is crisis-this, infinity-that.
Honestly some of my favorite vintage avengers
titles were the ones where there was no villain,
no fights.
Just these couple of friends hanging out in
Avengers Mansion doing crosswords.
And this is where you could get all that subtext
about the Scarlet Witch because sometimes
half of an issue was just being a psychic
fly on the wall looking at drama going on
in Avengers Mansion.
So you could have The Vision and The Scarlet
Witch having a whole conversation for pages
at a time.
Comic books, classically, were also more comfortable
having storylines drawn out over many years,
with writers being attached to titles for
just as long.
Which allowed creators to establish and develop
characters by using repetition of patterns,
rather than one-off mentions in a panel of
a crossover title.
You could never have a storyline like the
Xmen’s Phoenix and Dark Phoenix sagas today.
The long-format episodic storytelling gave
artists the opportunity to develop character
beats as much as the writers.
These books, which are primarily visual, had
the opportunity to show, rather than tell.
The heartbroken expression on Wanda’s face
could say just as much as a line of dialogue.
You didn’t need to describe Captain America’s
fighting style, you could show it.
Again.
Props to Jack Kirby.
Which means that creators could establish
character traits without describing them explicitly.
Instead, repeatedly showing the readers how
these characters acted.
But to do this, it takes multiple instances
of showing the audience before it really begins
to sink in as a pattern.
But being able to flush out characters over
longer periods of time allowed for these kinds
of patterns to develop, and for clear — or
at least somewhat clear — rules about how
this character would act in certain situations
to arise.
And it was during this magical time when comics
were still free enough to have entire issues
of dialogue, and allow female characters to
be different, that the gays first started
gravitating toward The Scarlet Witch.
But how did this suburban housewife with two
kids become the gay icon we know her as today?
Well, like any good Bronze Age comics arc,
it’s a long story.
When it comes to comic book stories, people
usually default to Origin stories as the means
of developing an early gauge for the character.
The origin story is pivotal to a comic book
character because they usually outline why
the hero fights.
At least…
the good ones do.
The quintessential archetype in this case
is Batman.
His parents were killed in a random act of
violence, and so he sets out to prevent random
acts of violence.
Since then, Batman’s whole psychological
state of being has been expanded to the point
where there’s an argument to make that his
central rogues gallery can be seen as a reflection
of his own psychosis.
The penguin as per his status as established
wealth.
The riddler as per his own egoism and intelligence-obsession.
Two-face as per his conflicting ideologies
of justice.
The joker represents his natural inclination
towards wanton theatrics.
Etc.
In instances like Batman, Spider-Man, and
even Iron Man, a component of their backstory
features a trauma which then leads them to
compulsively prevent that trauma from happening
to others.
Other origin stories, like Superman, Captain
America, Dr. Strange, or various versions
of The Flash focus on why and how this character
has the abilities they do.
And I’m not saying one leads to a better
character than the other.
But when it comes to origin trauma, Wanda
Maximoff could be a frontrunner for the worst.
childhood.
ever.
She and her brother, Pietro, or Quicksilver,
were European orphans of Romani descent.
Without a family, they wandered around southeastern
Europe, taking work and accommodations when
they could.
It also happened that they were mutants —
Hello.
My name is James Somerton.
You may recognize me from such videos as:
“Adult Gay Man Yells About Disney”
“Adult Gay Man Complains About Korean Webcomics”
“Adult Gay Man Yells About Disney 2: Release
The Gay Fish Boys”
…and the video you were just watching.
I realize I just said that Wanda Maximoff
is a mutant, and implied that’s where her
powers come from.
Before going forward, I’d like to take a
moment to acknowledge that this is an egregious
simplification, and depending upon which comic
you’re reading, Wanda may or may not still
be a mutant.
For more information about the powerset of
the Scarlet Witch, please see my other video:
Marvel’s Gay Power Couple.
Which, itself is a gross simplification.
Now, let’s return to our regularly scheduled
programming.
It also happened that they were murtants coming
into their powers.
Which led to them being chased out of a number
of villages.
This kind of childhood and early-life development
itself is rife for a lot of presumed trauma.
And naturally because it’s trauma that happened
off panel, a lot of people don’t really
register it.
But we gays are great at reading into things
that are only inferred.
Consider the lonely state the twins were in:
without family or support and being procedurally
chased out of every settlement that would
tolerate them enough to only spit at them,
that’s kinda messed up all on it’s own.
How does that generate a functional person?
Marvel was being absolutely sympathetic to
these characters when they pointed out just
how easy it would be for Magneto to recruit
them into his Brotherhood of Evil Mutants.
Whereas Peter Parker and Bruce Wayne only
witnessed the death of parental figures, the
Maximoff twins had to endure day-in/day-out
traumatic experiences, completely alone except
for each other.
Which, the MCU explicitly depicts in WandaVision,
showing us the death of the Maximoff parents,
beat for beat how it had only been described
years earlier in Age of Ultron.
And in spite of this incredibly graphic-for-Disney
depiction of violence, there are still people
out there who champion the traumatic roots
of Spiderman and Batman, while saying that
Wanda didn’t really have any reason to accidentally
take a town hostage because she needed a vacation
from life.
But more on that to come!
Suffice to say, Wanda’s origins factor in
a heavy amount of trauma, and rather than
this trauma being focused around a matter
of individuals, it’s directed at a much
broader sense of humanity.
How humans, as a group, will treat other specific
human beings who are not specifically just
like them.
Already, the gay appeal is written into the
subtext of her character.
However, though Wanda (and Quicksilver) make
their debut as super villains, they quickly
have a change of heart and join the Avengers.
Because as soon as Wanda is given a better
option than being a bad guy, she takes it.
While they’d always been reluctant villains
while in the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants,
becoming such staples of the Avengers signified
that they could have been great heroes from
the very beginning, if they had gotten the
chance.
Magneto simply found them first.
While it’s true that Stan Lee made the conflict
between the X-Men and the Brotherbood as an
allegory for civil rights, he did later admit
that an allegory for gay rights was also valid,
in retrospect.
And admittedly, a queer reading of the Maximoff’s
origin may be a bit of a stretch.
But going forward, Wanda begins to embody
more queer experiences on the pages of Avengers
titles.
And that said, I can’t be entirely sure
if it’s not deliberate.
Marvel writers of the 70s and especially 80s
adopted a very heavy-handed approach to advocating
for social rights.
However, it’s also just a thing that queer-adjacent
themes wind up in otherwise ‘straight’
media — because it simply makes for compelling
drama.
Romance hidden from the public eye?
Family shame?
Disowning?
Striking out on one’s own?
Found family?
These things are generally uncommon in straight
circles, so they’re seen as heightened drama.
Whereas queer people — even if you yourself
haven’t experienced this, you have a friend
who has.
But even if the Scarlet Witch wasn’t written
with exclusively queer appeal, it is a reason
for why queer people, even on a subliminal
level, found her appealing.
And she had lots of drama.
However, her first role on the Avengers wasn’t
to be Vision’s girlfriend and wife.
Wanda was the first real Avenger to show any
heart.
Villains would often target her as a damsel
in distress simply because she was the least
inclined toward open combat.
However, Wanda had a penchant for, as a captive
or not, reasoning and empathizing with these
villains.
But in spite of this semi-regular pattern,
The Scarlet Witch was routinely described
as one of the most powerful Avengers — and
this was even before her first power-explosion
in the Darker Than Scarlet story arc.
Which the other kind of… curious thing about
the Scarlet Witch is that even before she
had queer children of her own, she found herself
mothering those who had been outcast.
Specifically in one case, she encouraged Toad
to leave Magneto behind… because the master
of magnetism didn’t seem to treat his brotherhood
of mutants with that much respect.
In spite of the fact that most found Mortimer
Toynbee to be repulsive, Wanda took it upon
herself to look out for the lil’ guy.
And sure this may be an instance of Wanda
being ‘the woman hero’ who, as feminist
critics argue is the role for women in action,
to be caring and resolve conflict through
empathy.
It’s worth noting that while Wanda conforms
to this, she is the gross exception among
Marvel women.
The only other character like her that I can
think of would be Sue Storm.
Because, yes, you had ‘the moms’ but most
of Marvel’s female heroes were She-Hulk,
the Wasp, Tigra, Kitty Pryde, Storm, Emma
Frost, Mystique, one of…
Jean Grey’s clones or alternate reality
evil twins.
But as far as gay appeal, the 70s and 80s
were a time where a lot of queer people had
mothers who rejected them.
And the mothers we did have were the mothers
that chose us, not necessarily the ones who
brought us into the world.
Wanda was abundantly established as a ‘mom’
who did choose you.
So…
That’s touching, at the very least.
However, unlike Sue Storm who became Sue Richards,
Wanda was not strictly heterosexualized.
When you add in the other things…
Like the tumultuous youth of being shamed
and scorned by society at large.
Going to New York and developing a found family
who wants to take the things about you society
has rejected and use it to help people.
And then… to say nothing of finding a surrogate
maternal figure in Agatha Harkness.
(Wandavision had a significant departure from
the comics here, both of them Drag-Queen-Esque)
When it comes to all of that, Wanda does begin
to embody — at least a very sensitive and
comics-code friendly depiction of what the
queer community was going through at the time.
Before House of M dominated the Marvel fandom’s
perception of the Scarlet Witch, and many
fans to this day believe that’s the only
significant thing that she ever provided to
Marvel 616, the Scarlet Witch was most notably
recognized for her rather…
queer love affair…
with a robot.
Or, to be more politically correct, Synthezoid.
Now Human/Robot romances are, to this day,
not at all very common.
So back in the day, it was seen as a bit of
an anomaly.
For months and months, these two played soap
opera with readers' feelings.
Will-they/won’t-they constantly.
Because though Wanda was very open with her
feelings for Vision, Vision felt that a romance
between the two of them was improper.
Eventually…
you know.
That wasn’t an issue.
But for the duration of their marriage, they
constantly had to justify themselves to others.
‘Yes, I’m Wanda.
A human/mutant.
And yes, this is my husband.
A robot.’
In the same way that gay people… never really
stop coming out, you know?
And sometimes it didn’t go very well.
When Quicksilver stopped by Avengers Mansion
to announce his shotgun wedding to Crystal
of the Inhumans (it didn’t work) — his
sister proudly announced her romance with
The Vision.
To which Quicksilver was utterly disgusted,
and disowned her on the spot.
Granted, given the time period this also could
have been made to represent familial disgust
at inter-racial relationships.
But hey.
This allegory is one-size-fits-all.
So.
Having a wildly temperamental family who have
weirdly specific decency-related expectations
for what you ought to do with your life is
absolutely a gay mood.
So queer comic book readers would have seen
this and immediately read it as something
that had either happened to them or a friend.
And one thing that is part of the queer community,
and the role that queer-coding may have had
is up to some debate, is that we gravitate
toward those who have experienced queer-like
expiriences.
And this applies to real life.
Consider the Free Brittany movement where
she was kept under the control of men who
did not have her best interests at heart.
Also, to a lesser extent, the solidarity around
Brenden Fraiser’s decade-long self-care
hiatus because of so much Hollywood trauma.
Even if the individual is not queer themselves,
if any straight person would know what it’s
like, it would be people who share our experiences.
And we do tend to gravitate toward people
who go through these queer-adjacent expiriences
and come out of the other side as a nurturing,
empathetic individual.
Who, not only themselves try to live normal
lives, but who want to help others do the
same.
Though it’s not really part of the Pride
discourse, there were, in earlier Pride Parades,
a presence of accepting mothers who would,
either by proxy of their own queer children
or of their own vocation, would be part of
queer circles to be surrogate moms.
And while this was never in a comic, I can
absolutely see Wanda from the 70s and 80s
doing something like that.
Ooh… head cannon.
Willed her own children to be queer so she
could have a foothold in the community to
be the community mom.
Marvel’s over there sleeping on this while
they figure out how to shove as many fridgable
gays and rainbow flags into Spider Man games.
But when it comes to Wanda going through the
kinds of traumas she has, however queer-coded
they may be, she just wanted a simple life.
Wanda, in spite of the magic powers, a superhero
found-family, and a fabulous penchant for
red velvetine, kind of craves the domestic
life.
Contrary to Marvel’s other power-couples
of the time, Sue and Reed, Janet and Hank,
Jean and Scott, Wanda actively seeks time
off from the Avengers to become a homeowner
and home maker.
And didn’t marry an abusive husband.
Whereas the others kept their relationships
and marriages going with their respective
teams, Wanda and Vision — two of the most
powerful superheroes ever — were content
to bum out in the suburbs for a while.
Which is something that may be reflected in
our own fight for rights.
(Not mine but maybe yours.)
That the battles we were fighting for so long
were for nothing more than to be able to choose
a quiet life, if we wanted.
And though this pairing was absolutely unorthodox
even by comic book standards, it was the fairytale
couple that worked out far better than the
‘normies.’
Janet was a victim of domestic abuse, Sue
was an invisible woman in the sense that she
was almost entirely neglected by Reed (who
is a bit of a bastard), and it took about
0.02 seconds of married life before Soctt
decided to start hooking up with Emma Frost.
Vision and Wanda, however, slept in on Saturdays,
they were affectionate, kind, understanding,
and had open, honest communication.
Imagine that.
The couple that everyone thought was too weird
to function ended up being really one of the
only marriages in comic book history that
‘worked.’
Especially one between two super-powered characters,
as there is a literal imbalance of power in
instances like Lois and Clark.
Sure, the Avengers were cool with it.
But left, right, and center these two had
to justify the ground they walked on.
Both as a mutat, a robot, and the fact that
they were married.
With Children.
In the limited run special ‘The Vision and
the Scarlet Witch’, these are the majority
of trials the couple has to navigate.
They both seem comfortable fighting witches
and zombies — however the greater struggle
is standing their ground against neighbors
and social forces that want to drive their
marriage apart.
But they were determined to not let that happen.
Wanda spent her youth being chased away and
running from every place she may have considered
a home.
And now as a married woman, she chose now
to stand her ground against bigotry instead
of packing up and leaving at the first sign
of friction.
Which…
does kind of mirror the path to Gay rights.
Don’t you think?
While in the first half of the 20th century,
the cultural mindset of gay communities was
a more…
hit-and-run style approach to rights.
Make strides where we can, but stay fluid
so that there’s no foundation that institutional
bigotry can target.
This was how P.R.I.D.E.
(Personal Rights In Deffence and Education
— emphasis on the deffence part) managed
to make progress on queer activisim, where
gay rights groups before then tried to ‘play
by the rules’ and made very little headway.
But the shock-and-awe tactics of P.R.I.D.E.
depended on being able to show up where it
was inconvenient for the straights and then
disappear before the cops showed up.
Moving into the 1980s P.R.I.D.E.
had long been disbanded under some game-of-thrones
style drama from WITHIN the queer community.
The cultural attitude of Queerness had shifted
and progressed to the point where we decided
we were done running.
There came the point where we decided to plant
our flags, where we were going to fight for
the spaces our community occupied.
And while holding onto a handful of inner-city
street corners had been something that the
community had always struggled with, the rise
of HIV added a sense of urgency.
Holding on to our physical spaces was once
a matter of building and maintaining our communities
and cultural identity, but now was a matter
of survival.
Communities became essential for our ability
to monitor and take care of eachother, but
also to prevent us from being pushed out of
our neighborhoods while we died in droves
to a plague our political leaders did nothing
about.
Having our spaces was something we could hold
onto while we lost friends and community leaders.
Disparate and separate we were more vulnerable.
But congregating in local areas allowed our
dwindling community to continue organizing
and fighting.
Like us, there were only so many places Wanda
could run before she realized that standing
your ground was the only option she had left.
And this may be why we identify with Marvel’s
mutants as a whole (Wanda specifically, for
being the only mutant in a friend group of
normies), because it brings up the question
of how much do we have to do and how far do
we have to go to be recognized as worthy of
simple human dignity?
I suppose that isn’t even really a queer
problem.
It’s long been held that Marvel is about
humans trying to be Gods, and DC is about
gods trying to be human — but I feel like
the real distinction is that Marvel characters
routinely save lives, save the world, save…
existence — and still the world as a whole
avidly hates them.
It doesn’t really matter to the denizens
of Earth 616, The Scarlet Witch is a mutant.
And as people are told to hate mutants, they
hate Wanda.
I mean it doesn’t help her case that Jean
is over there repeatedly eating stars and
solar systems for the lolz.
And this is the person the X-Men actively
keep trying to resurrect so I can understand
a little bit about why human kind looks at
the X-Men like: “yeah… maybe no.”
And as we’re talking about allegory, I think
this is now a good time to bring up the issues
I have with using super-powers as an allegory
for being oppressed.
Because while they may represent minority
groups suffering under systemic oppression
because bigotry, it’s worth reminding everyone
that the X-Men have superpowers.
Queer people, immigrant communities, black
people, and indigenous peoples do not have
superpowers.
We’re pretty amazing, but we can’t toss
cars in the air or turn invisible.
(Unless we’re on tinder.)
And when some mutants have the power to look
at a tear gas canister and turn it into cotton
candy, I feel like the analogy — and the
way that writers constantly bring it up as
justification for letting the X-Men run an
extra-judicious private army of minors who
make demands on global sovereignties — becomes
a little disrespectful.
The thing about oppression and being oppressed
is that you cannot even make your own government
listen to you.
But there go the mutants and then X-men…
demanding private islands that they proceed
to mess up with their soap opera drama.
But not Wanda.
Who, even before House of M was accused of
being a class traitor by the X-Men, and X-men
fans.
Referencing Wanda’s role on X-Men: Evolution
where she was a raving lunatic with too much
witchy power — five years before House of
M was published.
This look and vibe was drawn specifically
from The Craft’s Nancy.
But superimposing Nancy on Wanda is a bit
of an…
This was, naturally, a staunch departure from
the soft-spoken, over-powered avenger who
prefers a supportive role on the team.
And of course was aping on the ‘more evil
female counterpart of the main villain’
trope you see popping up now and then.
Not only mutants, but out of Marvel heroes
as a whole, Wanda chose the American dream.
Whereas other couples were heiresses, lived
in techno towers, or lived the fast life of
saving the world, Wanda (the mutant-witch
with strong ties to the primordial forces
of chaos) and The Vision (a mechanical living
organism who is often cited as the most intelligent
being on the planet), chose a house in the
suburbs with a picket fence.
They would rather live there, among humans,
than rent out a room in the Charles Xavier
Echo Chamber for Gifted Youngsters.
And I feel that both among the fanbase and
ride-or-die X-men writers, they would have
seen this as a betrayal from Wanda.
The X-Men’s messaging being that their strength
is in numbers, what happens when one of them
decides not to join the crew?
In the absolutist worldview of comic books,
Wanda is neither a GOOD mutant with the Xmen…
nor a BAD mutant with the Brotherhood.
So what is she?
Well… if you’re not with us…
Instead consider Wanda’s referenced past.
Her running from village to village in eastern
Europe while her only glimpse of America would
have been pamphlets and scant visions of television
programming.
Sitcoms and romcoms and musicals about the
American simple life.
The American Dream.
Things that, as a wandering outcast, would
have been completely inaccessible to her.
Wanda would not want the camaraderie of other
mutants because the first mutant to extend
a hand to her ended up being a total sociopath.
Out of everyone in Marvel, it makes sense
why Wanda would crave domestication, and why
that life would appeal to her.
What she wanted was the lifestyle she, as
an Avenger, had fought to protect.
After saving New York, America, and the world…
doesn’t she deserve a bit of a honeymoon?
Given that The Avengers team from 1963-2005
made $2000 a week, Wanda had probably saved
up enough money to buy a whole lot more.
The suburbs were what she chose because she
had an opportunity to live the life that had
been denied to her.
Which really does fit the gay expirience doesn’t
it?
All we wanted was the option to live the life
that straight people took for granted.
Regardless of who we chose to share our house
with, or what color blanket a nurse wrapped
us in when we were born.
And t thing about Wanda and Vision was that
it worked.
Things were going great.
They had children and, unlike the occupants
of Baxter tower, nobody was pointing any weaponized
technology at an infant.
And just when it seemed like they were really
going to make it, somebody pulled the rug
out from under them.
Vision and Wanda were broken up by forces
outside of their control.
Someone who was thought to be a friend, and
supportive of their marriage, it turned out,
only really ever saw the Vision as a machine.
With her husband lost to government bureaucracy
who refused to see him as human, Wanda’s
children vanished.
Taken away from her by a malevolent demonic
entity.
Also… something queer people have had to
deal with through history.
We’ve lost our partners and had our children
taken away.
It was never real.
The marriage.
The children.
It was a series of events manipulated by the
totalitarian, micromanagerial, timespace bureaucrat
who officiated the marriage in the first place.
The whole thing was just to exploit and manipulate
Wanda.
But her hope, her trauma, her past didn’t
matter.
She was a tool to fit his agenda.
Just like, in the early 1990s, as Bill Clinton
campaigned to be president, he promised the
LGBT community rights.
Marriage equality, legal protection, and the
ability to serve in the military.
He was our ally.
Our friend.
And then once in office signed bills explicitly
banning gay marriage and gay military service.
We were a tool to fit his agenda.
Being used as a political tool, and then discarding
us as a compromise for what an elected representative
really wants is not something limited to queer
people.
But what draws Wanda’s life closer to queerdom
is her campaign for love, marriage, and the
strife she faced for simply having a place
of her own.
Even today, where queer acceptance is much
greater than it has been for quite some time,
at least in North Ameirca, queer youth and
even adults struggle to find a place in society.
One that is determined by their expression
of identity, and not what is convenient for
hegemonistic census takers and advertisers.
Queer communities are constructed by merrit
and self-description, and not birthright.
So there isn’t exactly a predetermined roadmap
for us — neither one that we can conform
to nor one that we can resist.
And every time the hetero-hegimony tries to
quantify us — bloop!
Another gender identity materializes and we
destabilize another algorithm.
We have no determined paths — because we
have no inherited history.
We have no family tree to give us cultural
roots.
And that might seem nihilistic, but from an
optimistic angle: without a history, we get
to choose our own future.
Having rights doesn’t mean we need to all
ship ourselves off to the suburbs.
It just means that if that’s what you are,
if that’s what you want — the option ought
to be available to you.
And a discussion about choice, availability,
and wanting a life with significantly less
trauma than how we were raised is a much more
modern queer problem.
But don’t worry.
Against all probability, we, and the Scarlet
Witch, are still relevant.
I mean Wanda’s publication history is one
thing, but most people haven’t read every
issue of the Avengers circa 1963-2022.
So why do gays still flock to her deffense?
Somehow she’s this unforgivable figure of
targeted ire.
Most X-Men fans who read House of M didn’t
read the full Scarlet Witch backstory.
They knew the basics, and they knew that she
popped up now and then.
Heck — most Avengers fans hadn’t taken
the time to read through the spin-off West-Coast
Avengers titles that lived and died in the
1980s where most of Wanda’s story took place.
And so when Wanda pops up in the movies…
they think this is what she’s here to do.
Ignoring the 40 years that she spent saving
the world, she’s getting set up to be public
enemy number one.
But to other people, notably, gay fans in
the know, she’s here to be a baby oven to
spit out two gloriously queer babies that
Disney will absolutely put in theatrical releases
and would absolutely not relegate to streaming
on Disney+.
(In select countries.)
And in this post-Wandavision landscape…
It seems the essentialist good-guy/bad-guy
mentality of comics publishing — arguably
the worst part about comics — has migrated
into the fans of comic book movies.
Back when it was clear who the good guys and
bad guys were, the fandom was so wholesome.
Maybe a little cringe, but we all got along.
Because you could point at flag-and-sheild-man
and say: good.
And everyone grunts and approvingly nods.
You could point at war-crimes-metal-suit-with-lasers-man,
and even though he had crossed demilitarized
zones and conducted the assassination of forigen
bodies in a soverign nation, you can point
to him and say: ‘good.’
You could point at cosmic-war-crimes-hammer-man
who attempted an interdimensional insurrection
and say: good.
You could even point to war-crimes-metal-arm-man
who was mind-controlled into committing said
war crimes and say: good.
You could point at war-crimes-blasty-fist-lady
who then, upon realizing the imperialist intent
of her nationalistic culture, turned around
and helped oppressed peoples and say…
Oh wait, that one’s a little contentious,
isn’t it?
I’m sure it’s an exception to the rule.
Bad example.
OH!
You could point to war-crimes-spy-lady who
was routinely exploited for sexuality and
say: good.
At least until she kicked up a fuss about
being paid what she was deserved.
And then…
Well that’s a bit of a hot button issue.
So when we get to Wanda…
Can we really say that the Marvel fandom changed
when they were given a complex character who
openly struggles with morality?
Or can we finally admit there’s a bit of
a pattern here in the threshold of moral tolerance?
About the kinds of characters that many fans
are willing to empathize with.
Because you can take a look at war-crimes-horny-egoist-person
who committed multiple murders, genocides,
and interdimentional insurrections and say:
good.
And people will probably agree.
Oh how they will rush to the defense of Loki
with caveats and cited psychological studies
about adopted children, and twin studies,
and ‘oh my experience as a younger brother’,
and everything that can possibly be done to
explain why, though their actions are immoral,
their emotional condition justifies their
actions.
Their actions came from a place of pain and
neglect.
Loki?
Evil?
NEVER.
But Wanda…
I have concerns for society.
Sure, on the level of media literacy, but
also on the grounds of… what do you expect
from Justice?
Like.
Capital J justice.
What’s the deal?
Assuming we include the explosion in Captain
America: Civil War as part of Wanda’s kill
count — which… if that explosion had gone
off at the base of that building, a whole
lot more people would have died — she’s
still far behind literally all the Avengers…
except, oddly, Vision.
And even then, she was only a ‘war criminal’
because a collection of governments decided
that she was too dangerous to be allowed to
go to the damn grocery store.
Don’t you love it when your identity is
automatically made ‘criminal.’
But going over Wandavision, I’m still not
sure how people can have a takeaway that she
was maliciously twisting reality around her
finger for her own bemusement.
This show dedicated an entire episode — one
of the longer ones — to exploring her trauma,
which most of it, even then, was implicit.
That’s right.
Machine guns on the streets below her apartment,
and her mom shrugged it off like it was no
big deal.
I’m assuming that those of you watching
this video who know what that’s like can
fill in the blanks.
And then we actually SEE her parents die in
a missile explosion.
That’s DARK.
I didn’t expect that from Disney.
And then we go from there to ‘oh well she
joined Hydra so she’s BAD.’
Really though I can’t imagine growing up
as an orphan in that world would have been
a walk in the park.
The reality of the Maximoffs volunteering
for Hydra was a matter of being desperate—
This wasn’t even subtext, this is just what
was literally in the script.
Maria: File says they volunteered for Strucker’s
experiments.
That’s nutts.
Steve: Right.
What kind of monster would let a German scientist
experiment on them to protect their country?
And this is just the baggage she had before
the Avengers.
Following that, she lost her brother.
And when she woke up from the blip, she lost
Steve, the only Avenger willing to stick up
for her, and she lost her implied mentorship
with Natasha, and she lost Vision.
And the only thing she really had to remember
him by was the deed to a plot of land he had
bought for them in suburban New Jersey.
So she gets to the place where their home
doesn’t exist, where it never would exist…
And, not for the first time in her life, her
powers take control of her subconscious and
create a safety net for her.
Her powers stopped a bomb from going off when
she was a child, shielding her physically.
And now her powers created a world where every
day wasn’t a life or death struggle.
Shielding her emotionally.
The problem with media literacy and Wandavision
is that, like ballet, you’re meant to extrapolate
what’s going on from how the actors — specifically
Olsen and Bettany — are carrying themselves.
This is not the posture of someone who is
actively choosing to create a perfect world.
This is a woman who just… she just needs
a break.
This is not the face of a woman who is maliciously
mind-controlling everyone to act like they’re
in a sitcom.
This is a Lynn Manuel Miranda-style writer-director-lead
actor who is so fed up with trauma after trauma,
that they are choosing to accept their own
fantasy and go a little crazy instead of dealing
with whatever darkness is in their soul.
Wanda grew up with a vision of America built
from sitcoms.
She just assumed that everyone would be happy
if they were in one.
She is shocked and confused when she is confronted
with the reality of what she’s doing.
And she herself becomes more and more uncomfortable
with the situation as she becomes aware.
However, up until the point that she is aware
that her victims are experiencing her nightmares,
the ones she’s trying so hard to escape,
she does not believe that these people have
been given anything but a dreamlike existence.
She does not realize that they are directly
under her control.
Agatha: You’re even running illusions miles
away at the edge of town!
Magic on autopilot.
Harkening back to Avengers Disassembled when
she was out of her mind making an apple pie
with her dream-children while an illusory
Kree army killed Hawkeye — her friend and
staunchest advocate through the Avengers series.
From the textual and visual elements of the
series, we can conclude (and I say this with
the confidence of someone who actually engages
with the media they watch instead of scrolling
through their Phone while Pulp Fiction is
on and then declaring that this movie sucks
because they don’t know what’s going on)
— we can conclude that Wanda was aware that
she created this reality, or that she became
aware.
But we can also conclude that she assumed
that everyone else had just as much agency
as she did.
Or at least was as happy as she was.
And she is horrified when she learns that
she had as much culpability as she did.
To the extent of having very little hesitation
in destroying her perfect world to set everyone
free.
Vision: I know you’ll set everything right.
Just not for us.
Wanda: No.
Not for us.
There was never a dilemma.
There was never a longing choice of should
I or shouldn’t I. Nope.
Wanda immediately set out to tear down her
hall of mirrors.
And…
I still don’t understand how people continue
to hold her culpable.
I mean the show maybe could have done without
the tired trope of using a black woman as
a therapist to a white woman in the end.
Monica didn’t know her that well and yet
she was the one to absolve her.
But that instance alone shouldn’t damn Wanda
to villanhood.
Certainly not given the amount of stuff that
other characters in comics and that other
characters in the MCU have gotten away with
while still being venerated.
Honestly, the most unbelievable thing about
the Scarlet Witch is that you can have someone
go through all the things she did in the comics
and still come out as a functional human being.
I mean when you’ve got the power to erase
existence and all you do is take some superpowers
away, you’re probably doing the best you
can.
Movies-Wanda… is a little bit more rough
around the edges.
Given that there’s no strict ‘nobody dies
in the avengers’ rules at Marvel Studios,
Wanda does have some blood on her hands.
And it’s blood that she doesn’t seem to
be allowed to wash off.
She’s made mistakes — big mistakes — when
trying to do the right thing.
And even when she’s not trying to do the
right thing, she still makes mistakes.
But she’s not a real person either.
And while I have concerns about how Kevin
Feigie is going to treat a female character
with mental health issues around traumatic
experiences — especially given the reaction
to Game of Thrones’ take on what happens
when you give a lady too much power — my
real duress is not with the content — but
the ways that people are reading this media.
It says a lot to me, that there are hordes
of ‘American’ viewers who did sit through
all the Avengers movies, and who did see the
trauma highlight reel in Wandavision, and
their takeaway was: ‘she’s the bad guy.’
That in spite of veterans and psychological
associations weighing in on the show and praising
its honest depiction and empathy for victims
of severe PTSD, there are people who feel
that Wanda’s trauma, in spite of her successful
attempt to correct her mistakes, is no excuse
for her actions.
Even though Loki deliberately mind-controlled
people, they’re fine.
Peter Parker was abundantly comfortable giving
everyone in the universe amnesia because he
was inconvenienced.
He’s fine too.
But it really shouldn’t come as a shock
to me.
A man who said that ‘veterans with PTSD
are just weak’ ended up becoming the forty
fifth president of the United States.
So clearly some people agree with him.
And this is the world we live in.
One that has consistently de-valued mental
health to the point where most people older
than I am talk about therapists on hushed
lips.
Like seeing one is a scandal.
Consider the fact that existing outside the
hegemony — outside hetero-cis-normativity,
outside whiteness — that that entails an
amount of trauma.
In some cases serious life-or-death-experience
trauma.
Betrayal of friends and loved ones.
To say nothing of complex traumas from living
in a world where institutions are designed
to discriminate against you on a fundamental
level, and then being told by everyone who
thrives in these situations, and in these
institutions, that you’re just making a
big deal out of nothing.
If there is no empathy for Wanda, then there
is no empathy for characters like Wanda.
For people like Wanda.
And if you cannot empathize with these fictional
characters — then I don’t have a whole
lot of faith that you can empathize with anyone
who isn’t Tony Stark.
Who isn’t white, rich, masculine, and in
possession of a penis.
He was traumatized because he saw space monsters,
and built a genocidal robot that, oh by the
way, killed Wanda’s brother.
But his fanbase is SOLID.
The MCU has laid out a painstakingly detailed
account of Wanda Maximoff’s trauma.
To a gratuitous point where I don’t think
it would even feel at home in a soap opera.
Well maybe in a soap opera… we gays do love
a soap opera.
It’s easy to mistake Wanda’s appeal to
queer folks as being a matter of camp.
Or diva worship.
That we flock to her the way we flock to Madonna
or Beyonce.
She’s got the outfits, she’s got the poses,
the powers, the gay kids.
And there is a camp of gay men who will condone
any villianous behaviour from such a woman
because she’s fierce.
But I’m bothered by that just as much as
the ones who demonize complex characters like
her.
Wanda does not have to be a 100% hero.
Nor is she a villain.
Wanda is someone who tries to be a good person,
but given how much baggage she carts around,
struggles with trying to stay optimistic and
lighthearted.
And given that she’s aware that her abilities
have a terrible cost, and that her own subconscious
can hijack her powers and redevelop reality
without her conscious awareness, she’s under
a lot of pressure.
And now that the MCU has roughly caught up
to her psychological state in the comics,
it’s disheartening to see that there is
a section of the audience that does not empathize
with her struggles.
Or that they do not seem to have the ability
to see morality in shades of gray.
Or that, and this is relevant for criminal
prosecution, they do not care enough to make
the distinction between an action and the
context that leads to that action.
But the fact that Kevin Feigie, head honcho
of Marvel Studios, has signed Elizabeth Olsen
to a multi-movie contract does give me a bit
of hope.
Disney follows the money, and the money is
saying that people want more of the Scarlet
Witch.
That the watch-along parties of tough guys
ejecting their tear ducts at the end of Wandavision
was in the majority, and that there is empathy
and understanding in this world.
And that the rows upon rows of Wanda Hate
on social media timelines amount to a bunch
of people who don’t like that people seem
to be enjoying morally complex parables about
heroic figures who make mistakes.
Because everyone makes mistakes, and almost
nobody really feels that more than queer people.
Because it turns out that when you have to
suppress elements of yourself for the sake
of fitting into a hetero-normative landscape,
one which still to this day treats cis and
straight as the default, it can lead to some
pretty crappy behavior.
For gay people, trans people, nonbinary people,
bisexual people.
You get angry… and sometimes you lash out
at the people closest to you.
Even when they didn’t really do anything
wrong!
(Not intentionally, anyway.)
But their treatment of us may be a reminder
that there was something about us that didn’t
fit in quite right.
And yes it takes some time for us to realize
that it was nobody’s fault, and that they
weren’t to blame.
But when we do come around and confront that
period of our lives and confront our own abominable
behavior, we hope that others will have the
understanding to forgive us.
Because here’s the Scarlet Witch.
Who’s just… she’s just out to do the
right thing.
But at every.
single.
turn. of her life.
She’s hounded by some interdimentional being,
some absent father-figure terrorist, some
primordial god, some reclusive eastern-european
autocrat.
Girl just wants a two-story home with a single-car
garage and to badger her kids into good SAT
scores.
WHY IS THAT SUCH AN ASK?
Why is it such a huge leap of qualifications
and caveats when she just wants the same thing
that so many other people complain about having
to do?
The gays don’t need more divas from Marvel.
We’ve got Storm.
And Emma Frost.
She-Hulk, The Wasp, Moondragon, Dazzler, and
Elektra, from the comics.
The movies started off slow but we’re getting
our fair share of divas, now.
And though Comics-Wanda leans into the diva
poise, she is relishing in all the fancy,
fabulous things she was denied as a young
lady.
The Heels, the capes, the corsets — she
specifically likes the dinner gloves: she
loves these fancy, effeminate things that
she never got to have growing up.
So now that she can get them, she’s gonna
wear it out to fight crime.
(Bit of a queer allegory, there.)
But when it comes to Movies-Wanda, Olsen is
not playing a diva.
This lady ran out to fight Agatha in sweats
and a ponytail.
She wore hoodies and loose-fitting, feature-hiding
clothes.
I mean… she did have that glorious transformation
in Wandavision though, coming into her full
power, realizing who and what she is.
Where she casts aside her hoodies and manifests
a hip-flaunting skirt, those long sleeves
with thumb holes, and face-framing headwear—
Okay come on was nobody gonna tell me this
was a trans read?
Nobody?
I really had to be filming this at 3am — sleep
deprived — before I saw that?
In the end, whether its page or screen, Wanda
Maximof, The Scarlet Witch, is a survivor.
Queer people respect the poise and sass of
other Marvel Ladies.
Their power and command.
But it’s Wanda’s determination to survive
without bringing more pain into the world
that we really identify with.
From the time she’s a child to the time
when she’s an adult, she deals with people
being afraid of her, hating her for what she
is.
And the queer community relates to that.
We see her living through trauma after trauma.
When things simply can’t get any worse…
they do.
But she makes it.
Just like we do.
The lucky ones, anyway.
She is demonized and vilified.
In the comics when she tried to give everyone
their perfect life, the heroes of Marvel wanted
to kill her.
In the MCU when she tried creating the perfect
small town, filled with happy people, those
people looked at her as a monster.
Because when they slept they dreamed her nightmares.
The nightmares that she lived everyday of
her life.
And when Wanda lets go of her perfect world,
her perfect kids, her perfect husband, and
walks back out into the streets of WestView…
the people of the small town stare at her
with hate and accusation.
Contempt, now that they know what she is.
And isn’t that the fear of every gay kid
before they come out?
And make no mistake, from the day we’re
born we’re told that there’s a certain
way to live.
And when we come out, we get these little
pangs and subliminal notifications that we’re
inconvenient for the social order.
That it would be easier for everyone if we
didn’t exist.
And that asking for the slightest thing to
help ourselves be ourselves is a step too
far.
And that resonates with us.
The vilification of our very selves.
So maybe forgiveness for Wanda is something
we give her because it’s what we hope for.
And if we can accept The Scarlet Witch for
struggling with the great responsibility of
her overwhelming power, then maybe we can
be accepted for being just a little bit messy.
And within this comic book character we can
offer her something that we ourselves desire:
to be forgiven for the crime of existing.